Right in the center of the South American
continent, encircled by mountain ranges and
highlands on all sides, one of the most remarkable
natural spectacles is undergoing a relentless
natural cycle of devastation and rebirth every
year. During the wet season between November and
March, the Paraguay River and its tributaries
are rushing down the Brazilian Highlands,
only to be stopped in their tracks by an
enormous basin that slopes at barely 1 to
2 centimeters per kilometer. Unable to drain
away, the river channels fill beyond capacity,
overflowing into the vast savannah to create the
world's largest seasonal floodplain and one of the
most unique biomes on earth. This is the Pantanal.
To fully understand the mechanics of this complex
hydrological system, in this video we will
explore the unique annual water cycle with its
consequences on the wildlife and which challenges
arise, when humans are trying to built a livelihood
in such an environment.
Phase 1) The wet season
With the beginning of the wet season in November,
increased rainfall over the Brazilian Highlands
and the Chapada dos Guimarães set off a pulse
which changes the downstream ecology for months to
come. When precipitation in the plateaus increases
10-fold compared to the dry winters, the Paraguay
River and its many tributaries are tirelessly
sending forth the waters into the Pantanal Basin,
but once the slopes fade and hundreds of
kilometers of leveled savannah open up at the
foothills, the waters seemingly come to a halt.
Over the next months, with not enough pressure
to be pushed along, the water levels in
the river channels rise progressively,
until the river banks breach and the waters expand
laterally across the whole basin. Every depression
of the 150.000 square kilometer Pantanal, roughly
the size of Georgia or Illinois, slowly but surely
gets submerged, and pretty much every aspect of
the habitat undergoes drastic changes. Isolated
lakes are reconnected to the larger hydro-system,
meadows become swamps, hills become islands, and
the new sediments and nutrients from the hillsides
ignite an explosion of life. Due to the shallow
gradient and vast distances, there is actually a
significant lag between the precipitation in the
Brazilian Highlands, and the eventual rise of
river levels in the Pantanal. And even within
the Pantanal itself, the pulse of precipitation
impacts the regions at vastly different times.
While the northern regions experience increasing
water levels just 1-2 months after the start of
the wet season in November, the most southern
areas on the border with Paraguay are virtually
unchanged until March of the following year.
Phase 2) Peak Flooding
Despite the precipitation in the
surrounding highlands slowing down again,
the waters across the whole of the Pantanal are
still rising. The residence time of most water
in the system is roughly 5 to 6 months, so peak
flooding across the system will occur at vastly
different times. Around May, however, when the
northern sections slowly start draining again,
the center reaches its peak flood levels
and the water is still rising in the south,
a total of 80% of the Pantanal is submerged under
a thick blanket of muddy waters. Water levels
range from 0.5 to 5 meters in depth, depending
on the local topography and what once started
off as countless isolated lagoons, rivers and
lakes has now become the largest interconnected
temporary wetlands system in the world.
The stagnant waters and lukewarm temperatures
between 25 and 30°C result in the rapid expansion
of Water Hyacinth across the open water zones,
waterbirds start nesting in the flooded
shallow grass land and fish spawn populates
every nook and cranny of the new habitat.
Formerly dry forests become a unique arborealhabitat
and what formerly were hills, have now become
narrow corridors for terrestrial animals
to traverse the completely new landscape.
Virtually every corner of the Pantanal has been
reinvented and the advantage shifts decisively
to fish and amphibians who have plenty of food,
oxygen and shelter. This paradise on earth doesn’t
last forever though and just a few weeks after
reaching the peak, the waters start receding
and this new habitat slowly diminishes again.
Phase 3) Receding waters
As the rainfall dries up in the
highlands, the lush growth period in the Pantanal
Wetlands slowly comes to an end, and Brazil's apex
predators enter their season of abundance.
During the retreat, previously submerged
channels called Corixos are emerging again,
and the first mudflats start dissecting the
continuous watersurface from before. At peak
velocity, the waters in the Pantanal can recede
with over 10cm per day, orchestrating a precisely
timed choreography as the land gradually emerges
again. After 5 weeks, the sea has fractured into
larger lakes, after 10 weeks, only channels,
lagoons and depressions hold on to their water,
and after 15 weeks, nearly all freeflowing water
outside of the deepest lagoons and permanent
rivers has either refilled the aquifers,
returned to the main stem of the Paraguay
river or evaporated, leaving behind salt pans.
The sudden isolation of thousands of small
lagoons across the Pantanal now create a
challenging environment for the aquatic species
which found themselves in these small pools, with
temperatures rising, oxygen levels sinking and pH
levels drastically fluctuating on a daily basis.
By September, the water coverage declined from 80%
to a mere 20%, locking in most aquatic life in the
ever smaller pools, which completely reshuffles
the food chain. Storks, Herons and Eagles
now migrate from pool to pool, joining otters,
caimans and foxes in their feast on helpless fish.
Even the jaguar joins in, terrorizing the
rest of the fauna as everyone prepares for
the final phase of the annual cycle.
Phase 4) Survival of the fittest
By the end of September, precipitation in
central Brazil has reached its low point,
and the climate of the Pantanal starts resembling
that of a desert. Heat waves regularly surpass
the 40°C mark, relative humidity plummets, and
the sun is scorching the earth relentlessly.
For the following two months, only the
deepest ponds will retain any water,
the exposed grass starts to wither away, and the
sandy earth starts cracking up in the dry heat.
Most of the vegetation is becoming dormant and
relying on their root network to stay alive,
just waiting for the rain to return.
Overall, life slows down drastically
in the Pantanal and nature's dangers arelurking
everywhere. The brittle straw that once
was the lush submerged meadow has now become
the kindling for regular bush fires and in the
few remaining water sources, now covering only
15% of the Pantanal, ammonia is building up,
while toxic cyanobacteria are spreading fast.
Aquatic habitats have become a true hunger game
where the remaining species are fighting for survival.
The ones that are able to roam the savannah
seek refuge in the gallery forests
surrounding the permanent streams,
trying to persevere until the next rainfall.
Just before the return of the rain in the
beginning of November, the Pantanal is but a
shadow of itself from just a few months ago,
but with cooling temperatures
in the surrounding highlands,
the first clouds already start forming on the
horizon, ensuring that the cycle will continue.
Taking a step back, the wild animals are not the
only ones living in, and having their life defined
by mother nature's unforgiving cycle. The Pantanal
is also Brazil’s primary region for cattle
pastures, with enormous ranches called Fazendas
covering nearly 80% of the basin. The roughly 1.5
million people and 4 million cattle have adopted
a lifestyle in sync with the flood pulses, so the
ranches are run like nowhere else in the world.
Pantaneiros, the term used for cattle ranchers
in the Pantanal have immaculate knowledge of which
areas flood first and last, where the best grazing
grounds are, and where the safest corridors are
to facilitate the seasonal transhumance ranching
style, which involves constantly moving herds
around to access optimal grazing grounds. Fazendas
typically include high and lowlands, and can
span thousands of hectares.
Duringthe wet season, basic utilities often become a
luxury, with even the major roads becoming
inaccessible, and electricity supply being
based on generators and solar systems instead of
a unified grid. Every aspect of infrastructure
is built to be in harmony with the natural cycle
and to withstand the floodings as well as possible
but economic pressures to industrialize the whole
process are putting the fragile ecosystem at risk.
Upstream dam proposals for the Paraguay river
threaten to throw off the balance, while paved and
reinforced roads and flood control measures may
fracture the ecosystem, potentially deteriorating
the invaluable biodiversity of the Pantanal.
The effort to balance people's livelihood and
prosperity against ecological conservation is
a tight rope to walk on, but progress is being
made on both ends. In the year 2000, the Pantanal
was recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site,
and extensive national parks and wildlife
reserves were established across the whole basin,
which in combination with the promotion of
sustainable farming and ranching practices
paves the way for many more generations to
enjoy this magnificent nature spectacle.
Next to the Pantanal, the South American
continent has so many more facets to offer,
like the complexities of the Amazon Rainforest,
Andean heights and the coastal deserts, which all
come together in countries like Peru. If you
want another deep dive, I can recommend this
video next, or watch what youtube thinks is best
for you here. See you in the next one, cheers.